Importing Windows PowerShell modules in PowerShell Core (#226)
PowerShell/PowerShell-RFC: 2-Draft-Accepted/RFCNNN-Importing-Windows-PowerShell-modules-in-PowerShell-Core.md

---
RFC:
Author: Andrew Menagarishvili
Status: Draft
SupercededBy:
Version: 0.1
Area: Language
Comments Due: 10/10/2019
Plan to implement: Yes
---

# Importing Windows PowerShell modules in PowerShell Core

One of the big factors preventing existing Windows PowerShell users from moving to PowerShell Core has been cmdlet coverage. Specifically being able to use existing Windows PowerShell modules in PowerShell Core. Non-compatibility is due to the different .NET runtimes used between Windows PowerShell and PowerShell Core. Ease of UX is important when addressing this problem - working with 'WindowsPS-only' modules from PS Core should not be any different than working with 'PS Core - compatible' modules. Also this should not require any setup from the user.

## Motivation

    As a PowerShell user,
    I can use modules written for Windows PowerShell in PowerShell Core,
    so that I could migrate from Windows PowerShell to PowerShell Core.

> ## User Experience

Reviewer: Please explicitly say where is _current_ experience and _new_ expirience.

Author: fixed.

Example that shows using commands from 'WindowsPS-only' module located in `System32` module path in PS Core:
```PowerShell
PS C:\> $PSVersionTable.PSEdition
Core
PS C:\> Import-Module DesktopOnlyModuleOnSystem32ModulePath

> VERBOSE: Please note that module 'DesktopOnlyModuleOnSystem32ModulePath' is imported in a remote Windows PowerShell session, so all objects that are returned by commands from this module are deserialized and are not 'live' objects.

Reviewer: I am not sure that user scripts will works well with deserialized objects. I always had problems when I switched to deserialized objects. I'd expect that we use the technology only for modules compatible with serialization.

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately, I think it's impossible for us to know whether that's the case. I still think we're going to end up with more successful script executions if we automatically load system32 modules (which are *known* to be incompatible post-Server 2019 and are demarcated as such) than if we simply fail to load them

For reference, here is current behaviour that this RFC is targeting to change:
```PowerShell
PS C:\> $PSVersionTable.PSEdition
Core
PS C:\> Import-Module DesktopOnlyModuleOnSystem32ModulePath
Import-Module : Module 'C:\windows\system32\WindowsPowerShell\v1.0\Modules\DesktopOnlyModuleOnSystem32ModulePath\DesktopOnlyModuleOnSystem32ModulePath.psd1' does not support current PowerShell edition 'Core'. Its supported editions are 'Desktop'. Use 'Import-Module -SkipEditionCheck' to ignore the compatibility of this module.
```

## Specification

Today a module manifest (since Windows PowerShell 5) may contain a `CompatiblePSEditions` property to indicate if it is compatible with PowerShell Core (value of `Core`) or Windows PowerShell (value of `Desktop`). If `CompatiblePSEditions` property is missing then the value of `Desktop` is assumed.<br />
Functionality of this RFC will replace showing of the `PSEditionNotSupported` error message (`Module '{0}' does not support current PowerShell edition '{1}'. Its supported editions are '{2}'. Use 'Import-Module -SkipEditionCheck' to ignore the compatibility of this module.`) in scenarios where it is currently displayed:<br />

> During `Import-Module` a module wil be loaded into a separete Windows PowerShell process instead of current PowerShell Core if:<br />

Reviewer: Two typos in the line.
```suggestion
During `Import-Module` a module will be loaded into a separate Windows PowerShell process instead of current PowerShell Core if:<br />
```

Author: fixed.

(A module is located in `System32` module path) and ((`CompatiblePSEditions` is `Desktop`) or (`CompatiblePSEditions` is missing))<br />
If this condition is detected PowerShell Core:
  1. creates a hidden `WindowsPS Compatibility` Windows PS process (unless one already exists)
  2. creates PS Remoting connection to its IPC pipe
  3. loads the module in remote Windows PS process
  4. generates local proxy module/commands using IPC remoting connection and `Import-PSSession` cmdlet

>   5. when 'WindowsPS-only' module unload request is detected - unload module in remote process, close PS remoting channel, close remote process

Reviewer: We could keep the remoting for perf reasons until force module unload or current pwsh session exit.

Author: True. On the other hand, having a WinPS process + remoting session hanging around even if a cmdlet was used only once/few times is also a waste of resources. After sync with @SteveL-MSFT this can change if such user feedback comes in.

### PS Remoting Transport

> IPC / Named Pipe is to be used for connections to remote PowerShell process. Today a named pipe listener is created with each Windows PowerShell process. IPC transport has good performance and secured endpoints, however (unlike, for example, SSH transport) it is not currently supported by New-PSSession.

Reviewer: If serialization and proxing is key in the proposal why do we limit ourselves only Windows? I'd expect that this works from Unix too.

Author: I don't quite understand your thoughts here about Unix.
The main problem that this work is trying to solve - making it easier to use (some) WindowsPS-only modules on PS Core on windows. So the entire problem statement is restricted to Windows only.

Reviewer: If serialization and proxing is used it could work from Unix client too.

Author: Oh. Yes, theoretically it can (however not with the PSJob's transport).
It would have been an interesting scenario: using WindowsPS-only modules on a remote Windows machine from PS Core on Linux. :)

### PS Remoting Transport

Redirected process streams transport (same one used by PS jobs) is to be used for connections to remote Windows PS process.
A new WindowsPS-specific parameter set will be added to New-PSSession:  `New-PSSession -UseWindowsPowerShell [-Name <string[]>]`
Process streams transport automatically manages underlying process, so the lifetime of the `WindowsPS Compatibility` Windows PS process is the same as remoting session that owns it.

### Module deny list

This feature has a significant performance cost - a Windows PS process needs to be started and PS Remoting channel established. This can be a problem in some cases considering this feature also loads modules automatically during command discovery.

> Some modules don't work well with de/serialized objects (e.g. pipeline cmdlet combinations of 'Hyper-V' module);<br />

Reviewer 2: Doesn't Hyper-V already work natively? Or is there something here because of the SxS Hyper-V module versions?

> Also there are cases when user never intended to load a module using this feature: for example, using any '-Job' cmdlet tries to load (and currently quietly fails) PS-Core-incompatible 'PSScheduledJob' module. With this feature enabled, 'PSScheduledJob' module is getting successfully loaded even though user never wanted it.<br />

Reviewer 2: Sounds like this one got fixed

{
    // handle connection errors
}
PSSession remotePSSession = new PSSession(remoteRunspace);
this.RunspaceRepository.Add(remotePSSession);
WriteObject(remotePSSession);
// In case of 'Windows PS Compatibility' scenario, Import-PSSession is then run on remotePSSession to generate proxy cmdlets.
```

### Lifetime of 'compatibility' Windows PowerShell process and module

Overall RFC goal is to have familiar 'local module' user experience even though actual operations are working with a module in a separate 'compatibility' process. This drives following:

> 1. One 'compatibility' Windows PowerShell process corresponds to one local PowerShell Core process. E.g. if a same user creates 2 local PowerShell Core processes and loads 'WindowsPS-only' module in each one, this will result in creating 2 Windows PS processes and loading the actuall module in each one of them.

Reviewer: There should be runspace afinity between these processes, otherwise some runspaces from Core will communicate with one runspace in Windows PowerShell that it wrong I believe.

Author: Valid point; In some cases it is fine; in others - it is not. Unfortunately remoting transport currently does not allow this and implementing this is a significant amount of work. I'll add your point to the Alternate Considerations to keep track of this.

> Module deny list defined using a 'WindowsPowerShellCompatibilityModuleDenyList' setting in 'powershell.config.json' so that user can change it when needed.

Reviewer 2: As of today, this hasn't been implemented

Reviewer 3: This is now implemented.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Going forward, we will continue to update this list if new modules are discovered to have problems operating in this compatibility layer.
```
